Chris Kaelin, a geneticist at Stanford Medicine, found himself thinking about cats. Not just any cats, but the loud, lovable, and often male ones streaked in unmistakable marmalade. These orange felines have baffled scientists for over a century, as about 80% of orange house cats are males. Why, among all mammals that come in sunset shades, are domestic cats the only ones whose orange coloring is so tightly bound to sex?
Kaelin now believes he has the answer. In a 2025 study, Kaelin and colleagues report they’ve pinpointed the peculiar genetic mutation behind the orange coat in cats — and it’s unlike anything seen in any other mammal. “For more than a century, orange coat color in cats has been recognized as an exception to the genetic rules that explain coloration in most mammals. Orange male cats are uniformly colored, but female cats often have a patchwork of orange and black fur, commonly referred to as tortoiseshell or calico patterns,” Kaelin told ZME Science.
“Using a combination of approaches, we hoped to resolve the longstanding question of why this sex-linked orange color trait occurs only in domestic cats.”
Orange coloration in domestic cats almost always shows up in males. Only about 20% of all orange cats are female. Females, with two X chromosomes, need both copies of the orange gene to appear fully orange — that’s rare. Most end up displaying a mosaic of orange and black, a patchwork quilt of fur caused by a genetic process called random X inactivation.
“The orange mutation affects a gene on the X chromosome. In mammals, males have a single X chromosome and therefore one copy of the orange gene, whereas females have two X chromosomes and two copies,” Kaelin said.
In most mammals, orange or yellowish fur results from mutations in one of two specific pigment genes. But these genes aren’t sex-linked and show up in both males and females alike. That’s not what happens in domestic cats.
“In a number of species that have yellow or orange pigment, those mutations almost exclusively occur in one of two genes, and neither of those genes are sex-linked,” Kaelin said.
So, scientists knew they were chasing a mutation unique to the feline X chromosome. But, until now, the exact spot remained elusive.
