Issy was 27 when she bought herself an apartment in zone five of Greater London with four years’ worth of savings from training and working as a lawyer. She picked up the keys and painted the walls pink, adding a matching blush velvet sofa in the lounge and artwork painted by her closest friends on the walls. From the floor to the ceiling, it was all hers. Single women and widows were legally allowed to own their own homes in England and Wales long before the 20th century, but banks and building societies would routinely refuse them mortgages unless they had a husband, male guarantor or evidence they wouldn’t leave work upon marriage or pregnancy. After the Sex Discrimination Act was passed in 1975, this tide began to turn. Just over half a century later, women now make up 47 per cent of mortgage applications following a surge in solo buyers – and the reaction has been troubling. 
“I’ve had a lot of guys call me intimidating, which is weird because I’m a friendly person,” says Issy of the reactions to her homeownership. “I can’t tell you the number of times they’ll then go ‘oh, you can be my sugar mummy then’, or three separate men have said ‘oh, I’ll be a stay-at-home dad ’… There’s nothing wrong with that – but I barely know them,” she adds. Notably, some studies have found that men are more likely to marry for money than women. It’s unsurprising that solo female homeownership is on the rise. For the first time ever, women are outstripping men when it comes to higher education. Plus, in the three months to December, the rate of unemployment for men hit 5.7 per cent, a whole percentage point higher than the percentage registered for women. Meanwhile, Gen Z have reversed their gender pay gap, with women aged 16 to 24 in full-time work earning an average of £2,200 more per year than men in the same age bracket, according to the Centre for Social Justice.
“I’m in this weird space now where men can’t do much for me,” Issy says, reflecting on her inability to meet a “genuine person” on her hunt for love. She’d like to find a kind, funny and supportive guy – but when it comes to security: “I’ve probably already done it for myself,” she laughs.
Not being able to lean on this crutch of necessity appears to be, in many cases, single men’s exact fear: 32-year-old recruiter Zizi bought her flat in south London in 2022 after saving up for five years – and her ex boyfriend didn’t like their financial parity: “He was intimidated by my success and openly admitted to me that every girl he dated before me had earned a quarter of what he earned,” she says. “That’s why me and him aren’t together anymore.” 